# Vulnerabilities in multi-factor authentication

In this section, we'll look at some of the vulnerabilities that can occur in multi-factor authentication mechanisms. We've also provided several interactive labs to demonstrate how you can exploit these vulnerabilities in multi-factor authentication.

Many websites rely exclusively on single-factor authentication using a password to authenticate users. However, some require users to prove their identity using multiple authentication factors.

Verifying biometric factors is impractical for most websites. However, it is increasingly common to see both mandatory and optional two-factor authentication (2FA) based on something you know and something you have. This usually requires users to enter both a traditional password and a temporary verification code from an out-of-band physical device in their possession.

While it is sometimes possible for an attacker to obtain a single knowledge-based factor, such as a password, being able to simultaneously obtain another factor from an out-of-band source is considerably less likely. For this reason, two-factor authentication is demonstrably more secure than single-factor authentication. However, as with any security measure, it is only ever as secure as its implementation. Poorly implemented two-factor authentication can be beaten, or even bypassed entirely, just as single-factor authentication can.

It is also worth noting that the full benefits of multi-factor authentication are only achieved by verifying multiple different factors. Verifying the same factor in two different ways is not true two-factor authentication. Email-based 2FA is one such example. Although the user has to provide a password and a verification code, accessing the code only relies on them knowing the login credentials for their email account. Therefore, the knowledge authentication factor is simply being verified twice. 

# Two-factor authentication tokens

Verification codes are usually read by the user from a physical device of some kind. Many high-security websites now provide users with a dedicated device for this purpose, such as the RSA token or keypad device that you might use to access your online banking or work laptop. In addition to being purpose-built for security, these dedicated devices also have the advantage of generating the verification code directly. It is also common for websites to use a dedicated mobile app, such as Google Authenticator, for the same reason.

On the other hand, some websites send verification codes to a user's mobile phone as a text message. While this is technically still verifying the factor of "something you have", it is open to abuse. Firstly, the code is being transmitted via SMS rather than being generated by the device itself. This creates the potential for the code to be intercepted. There is also a risk of SIM swapping, whereby an attacker fraudulently obtains a SIM card with the victim's phone number. The attacker would then receive all SMS messages sent to the victim, including the one containing their verification code. 